Lab Exercise: Create a Linux Automation Script

Step-by-Step Instructions

1. Create Dummy Files
Open the Terminal and create multiple text files inside the Documents folder:

touch Documents/acidoc{1..10}
✅ Result: 10 new files named acidoc1, acidoc2, ..., acidoc10 inside the Documents folder.

2. Verify Files
List the newly created files:


ls -l Documents/
✅ Result: Displays the list of newly created files.

3. Create a Backup Directory
Make a directory where backups will be stored:

mkdir Backup
✅ Result: New Backup folder created in the home directory.

4. Create the Script File
Create a new shell script file:


touch acibackup.sh
✅ Result: Empty acibackup.sh file created.

5. Edit the Script
Open the script in Vim:


vim acibackup.sh
Press i to enter insert mode, and add the following code:


#!/bin/bash
tar cfv /home/aciadmin/Backup/acibackup.tar /home/aciadmin/Documents
#!/bin/bash — Declares the script as a bash script.

tar cfv — Creates a compressed .tar archive of the Documents folder into the Backup directory.

Save and exit:

Press Esc

Type :wq

Press Enter

✅ Result: Script saved with backup logic.

6. Make the Script Executable
Change permissions to make the script executable:


chmod +x acibackup.sh
✅ Result: acibackup.sh is now executable.

7. Verify Script Permissions
Check script permissions:


ls -l acibackup.sh
✅ Result: You should see an executable flag -rwxr-xr-x next to your script file.

8. Execute the Script
Run the script to perform the backup:


./acibackup.sh
✅ Result: A new archive file acibackup.tar will be created inside the Backup directory containing all files from the Documents folder.

Final Notes
The script can be scheduled to run automatically using cron jobs for regular backups.

Proper file permissions and secure password management should be implemented in production environments.

Automation like this reduces manual workload, increases efficiency, and strengthens disaster recovery processes.

Why This Matters
Mastering basic scripting and automation is critical for Linux Systems Administration and is also a key skill for cybersecurity practices (as emphasized in CompTIA Security+ objectives). Automating tasks like backups ensures system reliability and integrity while freeing up administrators to focus on higher-level operations.


Linux Bash Automation Scripting Backup SysAdmin CompTIA Security+ Linux Administrator Beginner Project
